Oh, there we can see you, I think Jennifer and Denise.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have 20 minutes with us, so, we'll hand it over to you to talk us through
your submission, and then we'll open up for questions.
Oh, we cannot hear you. If you wanna just pop your audio on now that'd be great.
Yeah, that should be all good to go-
Perfect
... right now. Um, good morning, and thank you very much, Madam
Chair, for the welcome. Uh, acknowledging that it is bright chipper
early on a Monday, morning that we're all together, and
I'm sure, everyone's all ready for a l- very long
session today. Um, thinking of you all and all the best
for, the next few hours. Um, also a good morning to
Tui, the clerk of, the committee this
morning. Um, we really appreciate the opportunity to speak to our
submission, from Property Council.
Uh, my name is Denise Lee. I'm, staff at Property Council New
Zealand. I'm standing in last minute for my, colleague,
Sanda Malie, who has become ill overnight.
All the best to her. Um, but I'm also joined here by Jennifer
Caldwell, to my left, probably not your left on the
screen, who is a partner at law firm
Buddle Findlay, and the most recent national chair.
And of course they're members of Property Council.
Uh, Jennifer's highly experienced in RMA matters,
and is an associate panel convener.
Yes.
Um, and delighted to have her expertise with me, and thank you for volunteering her
time as a member representative. I'd like to begin
today by briefly introducing who Property Council New Zealand
is, and how we've approached the submission that you have before you
today. Um, once again, thank you very much for your
time. Property Council New Zealand is the leading national
voice for the property industry. Um, and property, of course, is the
country's, largest industry by GDP
contribution at 15%. We're, we're a not...
Property Council's a not-for-profit organization representing more than
580 member companies, which is actually
around 10,000 plus individual members,
and those are property professionals right across the country,
representing the commercial, industrial, retail, and
residential sectors. So we're, we're quite broad.
We're not homogenous. Um, out of those sectors
come not just developers, but architects,
planners, property consultants and analysts,
councils, iwi representatives, Kāinga Ora, Tāmaki
Regeneration Company, banks,
insurance companies just to name a few.
Our purpose is simple, so our unified purpose is simple, and that
is together shaping cities where communities
thrive. We aim to support the,
development of a resource planning system that is both
effective and efficient. We have a
voluntary... Now this is, speaking to how our submission came
to be. We have a voluntary resource management,
system task force, and that comprises of
approximately 45 members who volunteer their time, and they
carefully work through details of the legislation
with us. Absolutely there are differing views in that
task force, but the signed off consensus is what you read
today, and we take pride as an organization to
reflect what the practitioners, that's our members, are
telling us that their experiences tell them.
I'm gonna turn now to our comments on the bill, and I'll hand over to
the fantastic... We, we debated on whether I'd say fantastic, but I'm
gonna say fantastic Jennifer Caldwell.
Thanks again for your time.
Uh, good morning, committee members. Um, thank you, Denise.
Um, it's a privilege to be before you today.
Um, I think, what comes out of Denise's introduction about the,
the, the, the constitution of, of Property Council, you know,
550 member companies, the, the, the
submission has focused in, you know, an e- extensive
body of lived experience by all of our members, really
based on a lot of, practical experiences,
sometimes, n- not happy experiences, but, but
also, off the back of a 50-year commitment, 'cause this organization's been
around for 50 years. Uh, and all of the members effectively
regard themselves as custodians of places, not custodians of
assets. Um, I think that's important.
The submission comprises some 69 individual
recommendations. A number of them are very detailed, and
they're all, annexed and listed at the back of our submission.
I want to make, six key points today.
So focusing on six key themes that have emerged from, from the
submission. Um, and all of those are
really aimed at,
you know, expressing support, for the reform.
It's a huge body of work, and there are some things in there
that, our members are very, very happy with.
Um, I suppose the next level for us is ensuring, that
we can achieve as much certainty as possible in the way the system operates.
Um, you know, really approve and appreciate the commitment to
standardized approaches across the country, to give clear national
direction and set goals, and to improve accountability,
particularly at local authorities. Uh, so all of that is very welcome.
So our recommendations are, are, are looking, at a, in a little more,
granular detail at what will help us to achieve, greater
certainty, because, you know, i- in a property context, in an
investment context-Uncertainty and lack of clarity increases
risk, and it often delays investment decisions from being
made. And we're all committed to, you know, a
productive, economically successful,
society, i- in which development can
occur in a way that's seamless and efficient.
Uh, so, you know, removing any of those little tension points is very much the
focus of, of what we've said in our submission.
Um, and fundamentally I think a lot of the things we wanna raise with you just
briefly, acknowledge the tension between flexibility on the one hand
and certainty on the other. Um, so our key messages
are number six today. Firstly, our transition
requirements. Uh, we think there's some improvements that could be made to
transition provisions. Uh, we have,
also raised some issues about, national guidance
and m- m- sort of more in the, in the way of the process around putting that
together and perhaps the timeframes.
Um, there's some comments about, the goals, in both
bills, how those are intended to work.
Uh, we've got some comments about the process for spatial planning.
We're very supportive of spatial planning, but there's a few things we'd like
to raise with you about how that's done.
Uh, and then finally, the role of councils, across the
system, and the role of the minister across the system.
Uh, so starting first with transition to the new system.
Um, you know, the, the property sector is reliant on certainty,
predictability of rules and predictability of process.
Um, you know, often the plans for development are made many years in
advance, you know, having to bring into alignment
commitments to land acquisition, construction, financing,
and they're very much, driven also by statutory timeframes for
consenting and approval. So any uncertainty or abrupt
changes or disparity of practice, you
know, does give rise to risk. Uh, and, and I, and I would hazard to say
that that's why the fast track process has proven to be so attractive to some of
our developer members, because there is, much more
certainty in terms of timeframe and the way those will be
processed. Um, so a key part of the
transition is drafting national instruments.
Um, there is a concern there around, the period for
consultation of just twenty working days.
Uh, we are concerned that that, is too short, and that it will
rush, implementation of something that is, you know, the
bedrock of the system in many ways.
So we do recommend extending that period.
Uh, and we also would encourage, that significant work already
undertaken by many councils,
be carried forward, particularly in the context of spatial planning.
Although we also have a concern about the timeframe for spatial
planning, to be pulled together.
Um, transitional consenting arrangements are also a matter of concern.
Uh, again, they're not clear at the moment.
There's some exemptions. Um, there's a lot of
ambiguity, and we would appreciate those being clarified with more explicit
guidance. Um, and we also recommend that people have a choice
between consenting systems for a short period, given that, a lot
of the planning in advance of seeking consents has, has
been predicated on a, a s- a specific,
process. The second area of focus for us is national guidance.
I've already said that we think that that needs a little bit more time in the
consulting phase. Um, you know, one of
the, the areas where we think we really do need some,
clarity and prescriptiveness is in the assessment of natural hazard
risk. Um,
you know, we need nationally consistent thresholds.
We want councils, to be, told in more prescriptive terms
how to approach national, natural hazards, and also that
that extends to things like modeling and requests for extensive
specialist information. Um, th- those things, if
they're not clear, can delay the process and increase cost and
discourage investment in areas where developers
actually understand risk very well and can manage it.
Um, we think the national standards need to explicitly define what
constitutes significant risk in that context and give guidance on
when specialist reports are required.
Um, we also think national guidance is needed for consent activity
classifications, because, although we're
happy with the classifications currently identified, we need to be very
clear about what sits within that discretionary and restricted discretionary
category in particular, because we are worried that councils without
a significant culture shift, may well just
default to using discretionary activity as a, a sort of
a, a giant basket of concerns. Um,
and a little bit later on about, about culture shift within
councils. Um, we
are seeking, as our third key point, a bit more clarity around the
statutory goals. We're very happy that, that we've got sets of goals in
both pieces of legislation. Uh, however, there needs to be
more guidance on how those are intended to operate.
Um, we obviously will be looking to national direction for greater
particularity about those. Um, but at the moment, and I
believe you have probably heard from other submitters about this,
we think there's a concern around the language of "seek to
achieve" all of the goals in the absence of any hierarchy
or any clear conflict resolution, between and ac- and
across goals, not just within each set, but also across
the two sets in the two,
statutes.
Just a little phone ringing at the moment. We'll...
My apologies. Um, so yes, the language
of "seek to achieve," causes us some concern.
We're not quite sure exactly what that means.
Does it mean you have to try hard to do everything in the goals list?
So a little bit more guidance. Is there a hierarchy?
How do you reconcile conflicts? And we appreciate that's meant to be fleshed out
in the national guidance, but it is something we are be-- we will be watching quite
carefully.In terms of spatial planning, which is key theme number
four, very welcome, spatial planning.
The one point, the key point we would like to make is that it does need
a pub- a private sector involvement in the, in the spatial planning
process. Um, w- we know it'll be carried out by,
spatial, committees regionally.
Um, we, would really, advocate
for, private sector involvement at the earliest stage.
Uh, this is not just a spatial plan, to set out where infrastructure's going to
go, it also is meant to identify key constraints to development, development
of any sort, which includes private sector
development. Um, and the private sector has a great deal of expertise to
offer the spatial planning process, and we just wanna make sure that that can be
captured.
Uh, the other key point about spatial planning is that we think it does need more
time. Uh, there's a lot of information that needs to be gathered,
and, and drawn into a spatial plan.
Uh, we don't want it to become just a, a, a default, parking
ground for, previously developed material when councils don't have
enough time to go out and get, do ground truthing and gather-
Mm
... gather really good data. These plans are meant to last a long
time, and so we wanna make sure they're done, done
properly. Uh, the fifth, key point really
is about the role of councils. Our members can tell many, many stories of
frustration with various local authorities across the country,
and o- one of the main reasons for that is the lack of
consistency. Uh, many of our members have, have,
operate nationally and have had really difficult experiences with
councils, where, you know, under one
jurisdiction, a development will need very few consents and, and another will
need a lot, and, with different thresholds and different policy settings.
So the drive to standardization across the country is very much
welcome. Uh, we know that there's an intention to allow bespoke
plan content. Uh, we want to make sure that there are very clear rules around
when that can be developed, and, and perhaps a threshold for
when that can be used, and that there's perhaps some oversight of
that. Um, otherwise, we do risk falling back
into, a very much council by council approach
to what should be similar issues that can be dealt with in similar
ways. Uh, we very much appreciate the procedural principles
that all decision makers will need to operate under, and we've seen those
working well, in my view, in the FastTrack Act.
Uh, so practitioners are becoming accustomed to having
procedural, principles at play.
Um, we do think that councils will need to,
commit themselves to a shift in culture, and that legislation enough is
not to guaran- not enough to guarantee that.
There do need to be robust mechanisms to monitor council
performance, and, and we know there are,
th- there are intentions, to accomplish that, and
we've got more detail about in, about that in our
submission. Uh, finally, while we do support a strong
stewardship role for the minister, we do,
we do
recommend that there be some s- form of independent
oversight. Um, at the moment, there's a lot devolving to ministerial
discretion, and there is a concern that, you know, across
a number of governments over the next 10 or 20 years, that discretion could
be exercised in different ways that is not entirely predictable.
And as I said at the outset, you know, certainty and predictability of
application is really a key, a key issue for our members who are making
long-term investment decisions.
Um, I think, that is probably all we need to say.
I know there are some questions, and we're happy to move to
those.
Brilliant. Well, thank you very much for that thorough submission.
Uh, look, we've got a couple of questions. We'll start with Grant McCullum.
Yeah, thanks very much, team. Um, I suppose the, one of the themes that
comes through is, I, I, I suppose my concern is I've
had feedback around this, and if you struck this as well, is the
quality of, of the planners and in particular in the small councils,
around the country. Do you, any comment on
that?
Um, p- part of it m- may be quality, but I think part of it's also,
capacity. Some of the smaller councils-
Mm
... simply don't have capacity in their planning teams-
Yeah
... to respond to things as they need to.
Um, a- and that, you know, often forces them to, to take on,
consultants. Um, but, whether there's a quality
issue, that really depends on lived experience.
Um, I've, as a, as a planning lawyer myself, I have had some issues with that, so I
imagine there have been issues. But I do think principally it's a capacity issue.
Okay. Thank you.
And Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks, Chair. Um, thanks, Property Council.
I just wanted to maybe eke out a little bit more around your concern around
councils. Obviously, there's a lot of cynicism through your mem- members
around, you know, the, the vast and dis- disparate experiences around
consistency. You talk about some more, obviously culture shift,
but robust mechanisms you mentioned.
Um, and I just wonder if you could talk through some of those you sort of touch on
in your submission, the centralized monitoring, those sorts of things, in
terms of how we can improve council performance,
without, you know, adding more bureaucracy.
Yeah. Um, one of the things that we go into in more detail in our submission is
this, is the monitoring regime.
You know, we have had concerns in the past that councils, when they're
reporting their statistics in terms of consent processing, for
example, are sort of lumping everything in together and, saying
that they process, you know, 95% of their consent applications
without notification, and, and ultimately they're granting
97%. But there's not a lot of disaggregation, so there's not a lot
of visibility of the detail that underpins that
reporting. Um, w- you know, wh- while it's true that a lot of consents are
processed non-notified, a lot of them are very, very small, very,
very minor consents which can be turned around very quickly.
It's the more complex things that are taking time, and those are the
things where we do have concerns based on experience
of, you know, processing times and, you know,
information requests being used, in a way that suggests
that, um-Councils just want to maximize the time they have
available, and they just want to get out information requests, put things on
hold, refuse to advance processing until they get exactly what they
want. And if you as an applicant try to insist that they're
getting all you're going to give them and they need to move forward, they simply
won't. So there have been instances of obstruction,
and I'm sure our members could give you chapter and verse about that.
So we think monitoring needs to be a little bit more
detailed. You need-- You know, whoever receives the monitoring
data, you know, needs to be looking for,
a little bit more detail around that.
Um, you know, how long are you taking as a council to process complex
applications? What was the-- what were the steps that led to,
time frames being blown out or extended, for example?
Um, so I think, and then hand in hand with that, of course, is
accountability. What happens if you do exceed your time frames?
What happens if you are not meeting the sort of targeted,
disposal clearance rates for consent applications in some of the busier
councils? Um, I think that's worth active investigation as
well. And for those said issues, a big reason why we're
looking forward to Minister Chris Penk's, reforms in
the BCA world and-
Mm.
Looking at the all-important issue of proportionate
liability.
Mm. Yeah, totally. All right, thanks very much.
Look, thank you very much. We have met time this morning.
Uh, we have other submitters waiting, but we appreciate your time, and that
very thorough submission, so thank you for those insights.
Thank you. Kia ora.
So now moving on to our next submitter is Pou
Taiao, who is coming through now.
There we go. We can see you.
Popped up. Yes.
Kia ora.
Morena, welcome to the select committee this
morning. Uh, you have twenty minutes with us, so, we'll
hand it over to you to open up and then, we'll go to
questions.
Oh, kia ora. Ka mihi ki a koutou ka mema o tēnei komiti.
Ka huihui mai ki raro i te kaupapa o te oranga taiao.
Ko Ricky Allison ahau. My whakapapa links are primarily to Ngāi Tahu, Ngāti Toa
Rangatira, Te Āti Awa, and the many tribes of Taranaki.
Uh, I'm not sure if my other-- if any of my other Pou Taiao team is quite here
yet, but they may join at some point.
Um, firstly, thank you for the opportunity to speak with the committee today.
We appreciate you've already heard from a number of iwi and hapū submitters, as
well as several councils and other groups who have covered similar points to those
we've made in our written submissions.
You also already heard from another of our team, Tina Parau, albeit in her personal
capacity, and I'm sure her submissions left a lasting impression on the
committee. Uh,
our written submission outlines a brief whakapapa of Pou Taiao, as well as the
tikanga that underpins our engagement with the Crown.
Importantly, this acknowledges the Pou Taiao does not usurp the mana or autonomy of
individual iwi and hapū, and in making this submission, we also support the
submissions of individual iwi and hapū to this committee.
Pou Taiao is strongly opposed to the bills in their current form.
As stated, we have worked closely with governments from across the political
spectrum for over twenty years on improvements to the resource management system
that will strengthen the well-being of our natural environment for the benefit of
both current and future generations.
And while we have participated in a limited capacity in the development of these
bills, they do not reflect our input or meet our
expectations. Let's also be clear, our environment
is in a perilous state. That's not scaremongering.
That's backed up by the government's own State of the Environment reporting
and our, our Environment 2025: Te Ora Taiao.
That report opens with a statement, "Much of what you'll read here is cause for
ongoing attention and concern." The report highlights real risks to people,
communities, and places which, if left unaddressed, threaten our livelihoods and
quality of life for generations to come.
And while there'll be the fear, that report also acknowledges some of the negative
trends in our environment are stabilizing in places or reversing
due to localized action. Unfortunately, none of those highlighted actions that are
improving our environment includes intensifying resource use, increasing stock
numbers in already degraded regions, increasing water usage in over-allocated
catchments, or reducing the already res- limited restrictions on private property
rights. Where improvements are being made, it's often the result of
local communities choosing to come together, mostly at a small scale, and taking
direct action because they care about their local
environments. Environment de- environmental
degradation is also not an isolated issue.
I'm sure most people are aware of the increasing nitrates in Canterbury's
groundwater, for example. My Ngāi Tahu whanaungia have highlighted the alarmingly
degraded state of waterways across Te Waipounamu, a situation so
dire it has forced us to take legal action, seeking to enforce our rights as
kaitiaki to improve the well-being of our taonga after decades of overuse and
degradation.
My whanaunga, the MP for New Plymouth, is the ex long-standing chair of the
Taranaki Regional Council, will be well aware of the water quality issues his
region is facing. Madam Chair, you will have a high degree of awareness of the
immediate and ongoing challenges for the Te Mātau a Māui Hawke's Bay region.
That includes water security, the fatalities and widespread illness from the
Havelock North gastro outbreak directly linked
to a failure to protect drinking source water, the ongoing recovery from the
Cyclone Gabriel devastation on communities, people, and
infrastructure, and the slow process of building resilience to
reduce the ever-present risks from future extreme weather events.
The intense pressure on limited res- water resources to sustain the hor-
horticulture and farming sectors in the premier food bowl of New
Zealand. We're also servicing a growing population with increasing demand for
municipal supplies. The Deputy Chair will be aware of the increasing
regularity of severe water shortages across the North,
as well as the challenge of funding and supporting the region's widely dispersed
communities with reliable and safe drinking and wa- wastewater,
all while balancing the ongoing demands for economic growth and development.
These aren't unique or isolated examples.
Every region across Aotearoa is facing significant environmental
challenges. One thing is clear, we cannot effectively
manage the environment by focusing on issues in isolation or taking ideological
positions such as private property rights are sacrosanct.The environment is an
interconnected system, and these bills need to explicitly, explicitly
acknowledge that is, that is the foundation upon which the new resource management
system needs to be built. Instead, these bills are premised on
fundamentally flawed foundations, purposely elevating private property rights
beyond the environment and all other interests.
Pou Taiao rejects this premise and continues to maintain protecting and
restoring the health and well-being of our environment must be the overarching goal
and purpose of our environmental management planning regime.
That's not to dismiss the importance of property rights or other interests.
Iwi and hapū have strong interest in ensuring our rights and interests are
recognized and upheld. But without a healthy and thriving
environment, the value of all other rights and interests will only continue to
diminish. These flawed foundations completely outweigh any
of the positive aspects of the bills, including the spatial planning provisions,
which is of itself a nod towards a systems thinking approach and the
potential for environment li- environmental limit setting.
The first and foremost requirement of any new resource management system must be to
protect the health and well-being of our taiao for today and for
tomorrow. By doing so, we will provide for the long-term health and well-being
of people, including providing for our economic needs.
There are also some undeniable truths about managing natural resources.
Resources are increasingly limited and scarce.
There are limits on how much damage the environment can sustainably absorb before
unacceptable degradation occurs, which in turn causes
direct harm in people and communities.
An environment that is under sustained and intense pressure over time has direct
and significant consequences for the economy, for communities, people's health, and
their ability to sustain ourselves.
And many resources in Aotearoa are already fully or
over-allocated. These bills fail to address or even
acknowledge these realities, and instead continue to focus on extracting more and
more from our environment. Minister Bishop is fond of repeating his
views that the RMA has failed to provide for either the economy or the
environment. Neither do these, neither do these
bills. These bills prioritize economic growth, mostly at the
expense of the environment, and while that may give the economy a short-term
boost, like any short-term high, the subsequent low is much harder,
deeper, and longer lasting than the high.
In this case, it will be our future selves, our children, our mokos, and ultimately
the economy we are so determined to prioritize that are left to carry the
cost, in some cases for generations of our short-sightedness, if these
bills continue as they are.
In terms of the purpose and goals, both the purpose and goals fail to build a solid
foundation for the environmental-- for the necessary system approach required
for an effective planning and natural environment regime.
No activity exists in isolation to the wider environment, and the bills need to
explicitly acknowledge this systems approach.
By delegating the detail for how the regime will work in national instruments and
plans, the bills fail to provide any certainty or direction to
decision-makers. This will no doubt result in protract-protracted
disputes and litigation with the associated costs and delays as the subsidiary
agreements-- the subsidiary instruments are developed and
implemented. The increased centralization of environmental
management and concentration and increase of ministerial powers is also directly
contrary to the government's support-- repeated support for localism
and the importance of local commun- local communities deciding on matters th-that
affect them directly. Our concerns only increase when
considered in the context of the government's simplifying local government reforms.
While we support reducing the numbers of planning documents, the bills go too far
in centralizing the planning and environment regimes,
which leads to the Māori interest goals and the failure of these bills to uphold
the Crown treaty obligations, even in a cursory way, has been
well documented by others, and we agree with those submissions.
This includes the failure of-- this failure includes the proposals for enabling
Māori participation in the system.
This is a great concern to iwi and hapū who have, who have enduring obligations as
kaitiaki to protect and care for the life-supporting capacity of our taikiwa.
Like many things, the details on how Māori will participate in the bills are
scarce, with most operational matters delegated to secondary national
instruments. However, it's extremely difficult to have faith in that
process when you consider how woefully inadequate engagement with iwi and hapū has
been in the development of these bills.
Our concern, our concerns only intensify when you consider the substantial
reduction in the re-recognition of iwi rights and interests with the removal of RMA
Part Two provisions
and the relatively weak and limited provisions in the risk placement in Māori
interest goal in these bills. The issues with the site's significance to Māori and
identified Māori land provisions have been well covered by others, and I won't go
across those here.
We recommend really equivalent to the Part Two RMA Māori provisions must be
included in these bills.
In terms of environmental limit setting, setting limits to manage the use of a
resource within sustainable limits is a critical step in managing our
taiao. These limits must be set at a level that will protect the
long-term sustainability of the local go- local environments, informed by best
practice and robust data.
We must also take a systems approach that recognizes the interconnectedness
of the environment and the interplay between different
resources. The limit setting provisions in the bills currently
lack any certainty about what criteria will be applied in setting those
limits.
Any limits are also undermined by the proposed exceptions regime.
To work in practice, limits must be absolute, robust, and enforceable.
Spatial planning must also necessarily be informed by the environmental limits,
with environmental limits set prior to the development of spatial plans in line
with the systems approach we advocated for earlier.
Effective spatial planning will be a critical tool in supporting the implementation
of limits. The failure to get the sequencing right in the new regime will
ultimately undermine the effectiveness of both the limits and the spatial
plans.
Which leads to the allocation. Now, while the bills provide al-alternative
allocation approaches, they fail to address the two fundamental allocation
issues, over-allocation and non-allocation, or the failure to
allocate, particularly at the property scale, for key pollutants such as
nitrogen and
sediment.Many resources are
also, particularly water, are also, fully, or
over, in many cases over-allocated, both the takes and
discharges, and that results in significant degradation of our
environment. In many places and for a number of
resources, that means there is nothing more to allocate, and where those resources
are already over-allocated, we need to rapidly reduce usage.
These bills are frustratingly silent on this issue.
This leads to the related issue of, of reallocation.
Currently existing consent holders have priority when applying for a new
consent. This limits the ability of communities and decision
makers to enable you us- new users who may operate more efficiently or produce
higher value use to access those resources.
These bills simply repeat the mistakes of the RMA that lock out new users and lock
in existing inequities, including the failure to recognize and provide for the
rights and interest of iwi and hapū.
Our communities desperately need an effective and equitable allocation system for
the use of natural resources. While the proposals in the bill are useful in some
situations, they, they do not go anywhere near far enough.
They ignore the key failures of the first in, first served system, they fail to
address existing equities and allocations, and in most instances will simply
exacerbate and extend the problems with this existing allocation system.
We're also strongly opposed to regulatory re-relief regime.
As many have commented, th-this will impose potentially substantial costs on rate
payers as well as have a chilling impact on the section of sites of significance to
Māori and the other specified topics the proposed rele- re-relief
regime applies to. Not to mention the regime will simply result in
protracted litigation across the country.
The regulatory re-relief regime proposals are also deeply hypocritical
when considered in the context of the staunch opposition and outrage from resource
users at any suggestion they should have to pay for the use of resources
such as water, either for takes or discharges or other issues like the impact of
forestry, slash and waterways. These same users expect the
environment, and by association the community and rate payers, to absorb and
pay for the cost of the externalities of their use, while now also expecting rate
payers to, the communities to pay for the compensation for any impact on the use of
land.
Last couple of issues. Fresh water rights and interests.
So successive governments have continued to acknowledge
iwi and hapū rights and interest in fresh water, consistent with the High Court
affidavit of the Right Honorable Bill English back in 2012.
Uh, and while the previous Natural Building Environment Act explicitly included a
process to progress discussion between iwi and the Crown on this issue, these bills
are silent, despite Minister Bishop saying he wants to engage in this
conversation. By failing to provide for this, the bills will further
prejudice iwi and hapū as our rights are not upheld, and permissions to use water,
including both permitted, permitted and consented use, further undermines
our rights and interests.
Finally, I just want to comment briefly on the treaty provisions in the bills.
And these have been well covered extensively by other submitters, and we support
those submissions, so I'll be brief.
A descriptive treaty clause approach such as this government favors only works when
the things you are describing are compliant with the treaty obligations.
The provisions in this bill clearly are not, and this approach fails as a
consequence.
The second matter is the second, is the two-year window for renegotiating treaty
settlements. Again, these provisions are a hard fail.
We've advised the Crown from the outset this process and these bills need to be
cognisant of treaty settlements from the start, and they need to be designed for
the system. Clearly, that advice has not been heeded, and now we are being told our
settlements will have to change to align with this new system.
That is highly inconsistent with the commitments iwi and the Crown have made in the
entry entry settlements. Not to mention, the Crown
has shown very little capacity or capability to actually work with over 80 iwi to
do this in the proposed two-year timeframe.
Regardless, under these bills, most of the major decisions on national directions,
spatial planning, natural environment plans and land use plans will have already
been taken before the renegotiation of settlement provisions occurs
anyway. So in conclusion, this committee has been
tasked with recommending bills to the House that deliver an effective natural
resource management system. However, as many submitters have
said, these bills remain wanting in many aspects and need a lot of work to deliver
a workable environmental management system.
So I'll just finish by saying we're from the iwi, and we're here to help.
I'm happy to take questions.
Look, thanks, Ricky, for that submission.
Uh, look, we've got a couple of questions and a couple of minutes left, so,
we'll go to Huhana first.
Um-
Yeah
... iwi have provided another strong submission of
straightforward law from an iwi perspective.
And I just wanted to ask a quick question around engagement.
Pou taiao has been active with the Crown
and government departments for years, and
influenced and being a part of the design process
across legislation and policy, planning, all of
it. Pou taiao engaged in
the development of what we have now and what you're speaking to
today.
Sorry, you were breaking up. I couldn't hear you very well. Sorry.
Yeah, Huhana, your audio is really breaking up a bit.
You might wanna just get a bit closer to the speaker, maybe.
Microphone.
I'll turn off my camera. Matua Ricky-
Yeah
... how much was pou taiao engaged into the
development or contributing into this
legislation? Pou taiao has always been a part
of or, or at least advised and invited into hui.
Was pou taiao engaged for this purpose for this leg?
Uh, to be fair, we, we have and we've tried to influence, and I guess the
frustration from our perspective has been, the
advice we've given is not reflected in the bills as they stand now.
Um, so we, we, we have met several times with Minister Bishop and
consistently with his officials.
Uh, unfortunately that,
the result of those meetings and, and engagement hasn't resulted in what we'd like
to see in these bills being carried through.
Thank you. Uh, now Grant McCollum has a question.
Yeah. Kia ora. Um, I've just got a question
around, so
what, what, what with, Rikki, with, where do you see,
if you... wh-where do you see, iwi and hapū's
involvement in the, in the cons- in the process of,
of planning and setting environmental limits and so forth?
And then, and where would you ideally see it, and would you see it at every level
of the consent process to the point where, farming families, for
example, where as they're putting together their process, you have to tick it off?
How do you see that involvement?
Uh, depends on a case-by-case basis.
I think,
I've been involved in RMA work since the RMA was instigated.
Um, I think the issue is everybody wants to have better planning so you have less
and you need the requirement for engagement further, further down the system is
not, not so much required. Um, the problem being we've never quite
cracked the better planning at the front end.
We've always had to engage at the other end-
Mm-hmm
... in the consenting issue because the plans have never been adequate.
Uh, so if we got that right at the start, then there'd be less requirement for
involvement at each individual consent.
Um, but acknowledging that individual consents are also very specific and have
different, different issues that come up, there's no, you know,
standard. Every consent's not the same, so sometimes you have to be involved at
that level because the, just the, the issues that are being considered haven't
either been dealt with in consent in the planning process or,
um... In my, in my experience, it works
best when you just go and have a conversation at the start.
It leads to much less,
adversarial time down the track when you have that conversation at the start of the
consenting pr- even in the consenting process.
Go and have a conversation with iwi and hapū and, and figure out what their
concerns are, what their issues might be, and you can address it up front, and it
doesn't have to become a problem in the consenting process.
S- so you would effectively wanna be part of, like, like re-consenting
for, like, now to farm or take water in Canterbury, you wanna be, for
example, to use an example, you wanna be, you think you should be involved in all,
every, every consent?
Uh, 100% for water involvement in Canterbury because Canterbury's got some massive
water issues that haven't been dealt with in the planning process.
That's a
And that's, yeah, from, from Ngāi Tahu submission-
Yeah
... huge degree of frustration with the, the state of water in Canterbury that
they want to be involved at that level because the system's not working for them.
If the system's working, we wouldn't need to be involved at the end.
But currently, unfortunately, the system doesn't work, so we need to be involved.
Tha- thanks, Rikki.
Look, thank you very much, Rikki, for your submission and, thanks also for
your reference to the mighty fruit bowl, here in Hawke's
Bay. The, the, the sun is shining today and the, and the apples are
being harvested, so, no, appreciate those challenges as well.
So thank you very much, for your submission.
Uh, we have met time today, but, we appreciate your time, so thank
you.
Thank you.
So moving through now to our next submitter, we
have 350 Aotearoa,
who I can see there.
Māori.
Lisa, welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have 20 minutes with us, so, we will hand it over to you
to talk us through your submission and then open up for questions.
So kia ora. Thank you.
Great. Thanks very much. Uh, so my name is Lisa McLaren, and
I'm one of the co-directors of 350 Aotearoa, and
please send me a wave if you can't hear me.
I live rurally, and our
internet is not always the best. Um, so
350 Aotearoa is a climate justice charity.
We've been around, here in New Zealand for almost
17 years working on different climate change related projects.
We have volunteers around the country and
hopefully, if things go well, we'll be able to hear from a few of those
volunteers, later on in this submission.
Um, so I'll take our written submission as
read, and just, you know, highlight a few key
points, today. So we believe environmental
law must protect ecological limits sus- that
sustain life in Aotearoa and must honor Te Tiriti o
Waitangi, and it must ensure that polluters pay, not
our communities. Now, having,
done numerous of these, select committee
processes over the last, well, especially the last couple of
years, but going back, many more, I know that these
submissions can get a bit tedious.
You'll be hearing many of the same things from the same people.
Um, and what our volunteers were really keen to do to try and get
our message across, was to do something a little bit different
today. So I'll now throw live to Adam,
who's joining us from outside the High Court.
Uh, we're currently, doing an action
around, the court case that's happening, today.
So Adam, can you hear us?
I can. Kia ora, committee. Um, we're about to sing a waiata, just showing the
changes that we really want to this bill because it's really important to include
so many people. Uh, turu whā.
Need
environmental
limits, yes we do. Yes we do. Need
limits, yes we do. Yes we do. Need environmental limits, yes we do. Yes we do.
Need environmental limits, yes we do. Yes we do.
Scientists compensation causes our.
Strike them out. Scientists compensation
causes our. Strike them out.
Scientists
compensation causes our. Strike them
out. Scientists compensation causes our. Strike them out.
In the Lord
In the Lord No. Get
up.
Get
up. Oh no, the video's gone off.
Vote you out.
Vote you out. Vote you out.
This bill's
dirty laundry's
hit
the line.
This bill's dirty laundry's hit the line.
This bill's dirty laundry. This
bill's dirty
laundry. This bill's dirty laundry's hit the line.
Cool. And as you can see, we have so many people here.
We've got a wide variety of laundry items showing all
of the, things that we know this government's done terrible on climate, and we
also know this bill would make it so much worse long term.
So we've got one final message for you, the select committee
here.
Adam, we can't hear you on this one, sorry.
I'm just gonna cut you off now.
Oh,
can't hear me.
I can assure you that the lyrics are awesome.
Lisa, you might like to just jump in and, start talking us through your
submission just in the essence of time.
Yeah. What I can do is, get the
l- lyrics sent through, to you directly.
You're right.
Uh, thank you, Adam. We had a bit of sound issues.
Sorry about that. Do you want the last, the last lyric?
And give one more time or not?
No, no. No.
Cool. Thank you.
Thank you. Um,
so hopefully you got a essence, especially from the, the louder
part of the chorus, that a lot of our
volunteers are just really, really fed up with the changes
that have happened, over the last, well, especially the
last two years. I think this country has never
been, particularly good at dealing with issues like climate
change, but this last, two years has just
seen, well, it's felt like attack after attack after attack
on climate policy, environment policy, water policy, treaty
policy, all these things that have been built up over decades
and layered upon layer. We were s- you know, finally starting to see,
some real wins that would protect our
communities. Uh, myself, especially living
rurally, have seen, you know, the last
decade or so just how much climate change is now starting to
impact these rural communities, and it's the stuff that's
happening on the ground. It's the frosts that are coming at slightly
different times. It's the floods that are happening
worse or more often. And those things hit people
both at the pocket, but in their mental health and the wellbeing of how they
interact with others in the community.
That's the sort of stuff that this bill is lining up
to destroy all that progress that we have made in the interests of a
corporate few. Those people that are making the money off
this, that might even get compensation for their
crappy business practices
from our communities, from our pockets, from taxpayers,
from whoever. The people who are doing the pollution shouldn't
be the ones getting the money for it when our communities
suffer, and that's the sort of thing that this bill is lining
up. So I'll just, checking the
time, I'll just read a few of our, key points
out. I know you would have seen this in the submission, and to be honest, it kind
of feels a bit fruitless, to try and like,
get this point across. It feels like it, you
know, minds have already been i- made up with this.
I'm not sure of the voting makeup of this committee, but I had a quick look before
and I, I don't know if these sort of submissions are gonna do anything or
change anything or
I don't know how committee members are going out and talking
about this stuff in their own communities, in their own backyard with people that
are being impacted by this, like so
viscerally. But anyway, we'll do a few technical
points just for the sake of it. Uh, so environmental
bottom lines. Environmental limits must be
clear, enforceable, and based on
science. I don't think that was a really complicated thing to do based on
science. Climate science is so much clearer now
than 20 years ago when we were starting to talk about this stuff more
publicly. The science is clear. It's in, it's not
debatable. The bill allows limits to
be weakened for economic reasons, which undermines genuine
environmental protections. I don't need to go on about this,
poutaiao before me. The, that submission was
excellent. It, it raised some really amazing points and I know
previous submitters have also done the same.
Uh, councils should have stronger powers to set and enforce
hard environmental caps.
Uh, the bill lacks strong, a strong treaty clause,
which previous resource legislation included.
Can't believe it's 2026 and we're taking that sort of thing out of
legislation. This seems to be the most backwards thing,
about the whole process. Uh, we support Te
Tiriti being a mandatory consideration in environmental
decision-making. And yes, if need be to go back to the presi-
previous presentation, if that means that there's not the safeguards
to protect our communities, then yes, Mana Whenua could go in
and, you know, have a say on each and every decision because we don't
have-The process set up to protect the environment, to protect our
communities. Uh, mana whenua must have
meaningful participation, not reduced
consultation. Uh, and the compensation
that I mentioned a bit earlier, we strongly oppose provisions
that require the public to compensate companies when
environmental protection limits development.
There are so many places that we can infill and do
development in Aotearoa. Just, I drove through Auckland
last week and, I mean, it feels massive anyway coming from rural
Wairarapa, but the amount of infill and development that could
happen in those cities without breaching out into
other places and, and making the city even more
unlivable, it just, um... yeah, it's shocking that
we're still thinking about, living that
way. Uh, so environmental damage should
follow the polluter pays principle, another no-brainer.
If you're going to wreck our environment, you should be the one bearing the cost
to do so. Uh, we don't want this publicly
subsidized. We don't want hardworking people's money
going towards these polluting companies.
Um, so, this means the compensation
regime should be effectively reserved.
Now, it might be a bit weird to do a funny stunt outside
the High Court, but with these processes, people are
being cut out left, right and center, not just with
this bill, but with, you know, the
last, couple of years' worth of legislation that's been pushed through, and
people are feeling really disconnected, from the process and
feeling like they don't have a way to reconnect.
So sometimes singing a song, singing a wāta, doing a chant,
trying to get, other people to, to join in and feel empowered
is, is ways that our volunteers can really, you know, make a
difference. Um, so yeah, I'll probably
leave it there. There's a few ti- few minutes for questions.
I won't, be saying much outside whatever's already in our
submission. Um, but yeah, just wanted to thank you very much for your
time, and really hope that you,
take submissions from those that you might not,
ideologically agree with really seriously in this process.
So thank you.
Well, thank you, Lisa, for your submission and obviously,
the, the colorful submission we had from Adam there as well
outside the High Court in Wellington.
But look, we've got a couple of questions, so we'll go first to
Priyanka.
Uh, thank you. Um, and thanks for the creativity of your
submission today. Uh, just had, one quick
question on the point that you've made in your written submission around
wanting stronger environmental safeguards, and wanted to
ask you whether you would agree with what some of the other environmental
NGOs have said, for example, that specifics around the
goal, for no net loss for biodi- indigenous
biodiversity is too weak. Um, many have made the
point that you should... you know, the legislation shouldn't allow for
justification reports if environmental,
limits are exceeded. Uh, and there are
various other points that have been made around the sequencing of environmental
plans before spatial plans. Are those the types of things that you're
referring to, in your submission when you talk about
stronger environmental safeguards?
Or did you have something
outside of that, bearing in mind that you've made the point around climate needing
to be in this as well. But was there anything else from the environmental
safeguards point of view when it comes to the detail of this bill that you wanted
to include?
No, I'd say we have very similar positions to those other
environmental organizations. I think,
yeah, especially around the indigenous biodiversity part, it's, mind-blowing
considering how severely endangered so much of our
flora and fauna is that we would be even considering,
you know, rolling out projects that would continue to
reduce that or that would even significantly reduce it,
considering, you know, the dire straight- state
our environment is in. And I guess that's something that maybe it didn't come
through as much within our submission, is that
we're not starting from a baseline of our country as great, and that
our environmental state here is w- is doing really well when
we're thriving and all our, you know, bird
life, is, not endangered anymore.
We're starting here from a state where that, you know,
it's really struggling and report after report after report is
saying that our environment is struggling.
So to cut those environmental limits or to, to
put, economic profit above trying to just
save that indigenous biodiversity especially is,
yeah, it's just... I'm just surprised we're
here.
Thank you.
Thank you, Lisa. Look, we'll go to Cameron Luxton for a question.
Oh, thank you, Chair. Um, thank you, Lisa.
Look, how does, 350 Aotearoa feel
about, you know, climate, sorry, delayed
justice? And do you welcome having a planning
tribunal embedded in the laws as
proposed to speed up justice?
Can you describe delayed justice?
Yeah. So having, having your time in court,
perhaps.
A little bit more please.
So having a day in court where you... Sorry?
A little bit more, please.
Well, do you think that people should be able to, have access to the
justice system in a timely way so that they can
have their needs heard in front of a court of law?
And therefore, do you support having a planning tribunal
that takes some pressure off the Environment Court?
Uh, could you explain a little bit more about how that refers to this
bill?
Um, Schedule 10 of the, of the planning bill has
a planning tribunal in it, so I'm asking you about
the ability of people to access courts and justice.
Right.
That's kind of the-
I think that's outside my expertise.
Okay, that's fine.
Okay. Thank you. We'll just, we'll move on to Landfarm for a
question.
Tena koe, Lisa, and thank you so much for you and 350's
submission today. Um, I wanted to pick
up on, you know, a lot of your submission,
as I interpret it at least, is really just asking about
looking to the long term, and we've had a number of
submitters kind of, articulate that
in, the suggestion of an explicit goal
that might be, you know, something like the reference to
future generations and their needs that was in the
RMA. Do you think you would like to see
something more explicit when it comes to the needs,
of future generations, and could that go some way
alongside the improvements to ensuring
climate mitigation is actually, put in
these bills, go some way to actually providing for what you're
seeking?
Yeah, great question. Um, we used to talk
a lot in the climate spaces around future generations when,
climate change first became more public, I guess, the
needs to, you know, secure a livable planet for
our children, for our grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and so on.
Um, and I guess we talked maybe less about it, and it's probably not come as, come
through the submission as much because of that.
We talk less about it now because climate change is here, and it's real, and it's
impacting us today. Um, but we know that every
degree that the planet warms, that's gonna be more and more severe
impacts for people. So I would absolutely support
some type of recognition that if we don't do this work
now, it's going to be exponentially worse
for our children and our grandchildren, and that's a
lot of the, the conversations that I'm having out in communities at the moment.
It's, it's with grandparents mostly, and I know that's kind of clichéd
now in the climate space, but people are genuin- genuinely
worried about the state of our community
that we're leaving, and it's not at a country level, it's our
local stream, our local river. Um, the
fact that, the veggie garden didn't do as
well this year because the weather is behaving
differently to what we're used to growing in.
And so being able to lock something into the law
that protects those future generations for those even more
extreme impacts would be really useful, while also
saying, "We need to do this now. This isn't a, you know, this
isn't a 10-year problem, a 20-year problem, a 30-year problem.
This is a now thing," and we don't want to lock
in a whole lot of work that we're going to regret in
that decade or in 20 years or even five years, that
we're setting ourselves up to have these, like, you
know, industries
coming in that actually, you know, won't even be economically viable in 10
years because people will be like, "What are we doing?" So,
yes, I think, some sort of
recognition that we're setting, our communities up
to fail in the future is, yeah,
I think that would be good.
Okay. Thank you very much, Lisa. Look, we have met time this morning.
Uh, we appreciate your time, and your insights there
on climate change. So, yeah, you have a good day.
Awesome. Thank you so much.
Thanks, Lisa. Uh, so
look, we're going to just jump ahead, to
Te Ohu Kaimoana, on our
agenda, who is, here with us, and
then we'll see if we loop back to the Taxpayer Union,
for those following along, because we have,
that submitter with us. So if we can bring them through, that would be
fabulous.
Uh, next submitter is
s-
Oh, there we go. We can see you.
Uh, Te Ohu Kaimoana, do you just want
to pop on your
camera?
Oh, there we go. We can, we can see you there.
Three of you there. Welcome to the select committee this
morning. Uh, you have 20 minutes with us.
Take your submission as read, but we'll hand it over to you to talk us through the
main points and then open up for questions.
Ka pai. Um, just to note, we'll have two people join,
along the way as we're, we're ahead a lot further than, than
expected. Um, oh, tena koutou katoa.
Ko Taranaki te maunga. Ko ngā wai ora o ia rere nei.
Ka rere ki uta. Ka rere ki tai. Mai tai raum
o Te Huia ki Titarangi. Ko Ngāti Rāhiri.
Tena koutou, tena koutou, tena koutou katoa.
Ko Kylee Gregor au. I'm the oceans manager at Te Ohu Kaimoana,
accompanied by my esteemed colleagues, who work beside me.
We will have one more join online.Um, and another one popping into
the room soon. We work on behalf of fifty-eight iwi
organizations, recognized iwi organizations, and iwi aquaculture
organizations, who in turn represent the fifty-eight iwi throughout
Aotearoa. Our interest in the natural environment and planning
bills arises from our responsibility to protect and enhance the rights
and interests of iwi and aquaculture and fisheries in a manner that furthers the
agreements of the Fisheries Deed of Settlement and assists the Crown to discharge
its obligations under that deed, the Māori Fisheries Act two thousand and twenty--
two thousand and four, and the Māori Commercial Aquaculture Claims
Settlement Act two thousand and four, and Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
We acknowledge there is scope to improve the current RMA settings.
However, we are here today to offer some practical solutions to resolve some
fundamental issues with this reform and ensure this legislation is
durable, operable, and continues to uphold the fisheries and aquaculture
settlements. Further to this, we do not intend our response to conflict with
or override any response provided by independently
iwi. Um, we take our submission as read.
We'll briefly summarize our key concerns and recommendations before us
opening the floor for your patai. Um,
so we're going to go to point one. So the bill weakens protections for
Kaitiakitanga and Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
So the bill represents a shift away from active treaty protections within the
resource management system by removing Section Eight of the RMA,
which explicitly commits the Crown to upholding both the principles and
rights guaranteed to Māori under Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
This has practical implications, and rather than Te Tiriti o Waitangi
principles guiding decision-makers from the outset, Māori interests
are more likely to be considered later in the process and treated as partial
or negotiable rather than as a statutory obligation requiring active
protection.
The bills provide limited recognition of Māori rights with a narrow focus on
negotiated treaty settlements, failing to acknowledge the Crown's broader and
ongoing commitments to Māori. While Māori interests are listed as a
system goal, no hierarchy has been provided as to the significance of each
goal. This lack of prioritization, accompanied with the removal of Section
Eight, creates a risk that Māori interests may be deprioritized
in practice when competing against other natural objecti--
natural objectives. Further, the reciprocal relationship that
Māori have with their environment and the important role they play as
Kaitiaki must continue to be recognized through the resource management
system. Māori participation could be reduced to a tick
box consultation process as currently proposed in the bills.
At a minimum, we recommend that Section Eight of the current RMA and the
recognitions provided under Section Seven and Eight for Kaitiakitanga
and the relationship Māori have with their whenua and wai must be reinstated to
ensure that these bills maintain a framework which embeds Te Tiriti o Waitangi and
Māori rights and interests within resource management decisions
making. We also wish to acknowledge the introduction of the new
environmental limits under the bills which are proposed to be set using
specified methodologies through natural standards-- through new
natural standards. Given the central role these limits will play in safeguarding
the health and resilience of the ocean, it is essential that iwi and hapū are
genuine partners in that design and information of these new
natural-- these new environmental limits.
We also hold that mātauranga Māori should be meaningfully interwoven
alongside Western science to inform the creation of these limits.
Um, so moving on to point two is specific to Ma-- the Māori
fishery settlement implications.
The Māori fishery settlement was reached between iwi and the Crown.
In agreeing this, iwi understood that fisheries would only be managed under the
Fisheries Act nineteen ninety-six, and that a clear demarcation of powers
would exist preventing decision-makers from m-managing fishing
activity under separate resource management legislation.
However, the bill grants regional councils who are not parties to the fishery
settlement the power to override the Fisheries Act and implement rules that could
undermine Māori fishery rights and interests.
The bills do so while also failing to provide any recognition or
protection of quota rights, even though these are perpetual
property rights. To best protect and uphold the fishery settlement, we strongly
recommend to reinstate that there is a clear demarcation between the Fisheries
Act and the proposed bills in relation to the ability to implement fishing
controls. Te Ohu Kaimoana has maintained this view for a number of years
throughout various reforms. If this primary
recommendation continues to be ignored, at a minimum, the protections under the
current RMA, which is the Amendment Act two thousand and twenty-five, need to be
incorporated into the bills. Specifically, a statutory undue adverse
effects test overseen by the Director General of MPI
must be included in the bills. We provide further detail on this
regarding this recommendation in pages twenty-nine and thirty-four of our
response. To expand on our response, we note that the
rules that control fishing are at times applied without first
carefully assessing biodiversity within a region and the various pressures
materially affecting that state.
Assessments should be undertaken to undermine what stresses are materially
affecting the health of Moana and how these might be addressed.
Additionally, we would like to formally offer to work with officials to co-draft
necessary statutory safeguards for the Fisheries Act and fishery settlement
within the bills to assist in reducing the legislative risk to the Crown.
Um, moving on then now to point three and our last points,
is the Māori-- about the Māori commercial aquaculture settlement
implications. So while these bills largely maintain the protections
to the aquaculture settlement, there are some key changes that require
addressing. The bills have not carried o-over a provision from the
RMA, which is Sections Eighty-five AA, that requires plans to be
updated when aquaculture settlement areas are gazetted or when their
location or sizes change.
This provision must be reinstated to ensure that aquaculture settlement areas are
appropriately identified and protected.
Further, while the new a-allocation tools for comparative...
consenting have value. We recommend changes to Schedule 3 of
the Natural Environment Bill to ensure aquaculture settlement areas must be
adequately provided for, for prior to any
allocation tools being used for aquaculture space.
We also have concerns regarding the changes in how aquaculture activities are
permitted. Within the proposed removal of the controlled
activity status, our primary recommendation is that an exemption be
made so that controlled activity status is retained for a-
aquaculture. This would not act as a barrier to any development, but
would maintain current administrative tools ensuring the Crown has clear
records of all aquaculture activities.
This is so it can determine accurately and deliver on its 20%
aquaculture settlement obligations.
If instead any aquaculture ac- activities become proposed
activities, our secondary recommendation is that changes be made through
Schedule 7 of the Natural Environment Bill to the Māori Commercial
Aquaculture Claims Settlement Act to ensure that all
rec- that these are recognized under the aquaculture
settlement. Finally, these bills represent an
overall shift to a more centralized decision-making
framework, and we're concerned that may limit the ability of
iwi and hapū to meaningfully participate in decisions impacting their
rohe, particularly in regards to aquaculture settlement space and its
protection. We recommend that clauses within the planning bill must be
strengthened and amended to ensure the spatial planning committees have
particular regard to the views of iwi authorities and customary marine
tit- title holders in relation to activities within their moana.
We have provided specific clause recommendations to enable this on pages
34 to 36 of our response. Um, and
we officially offer our time and expertise to assist officials with
practical solutions for points we have raised in order to progress
robust new resource management settings.
Um, so just thank you for your time, and we'll open the floor to pātai, and I'll
defer to each of my colleagues depending on what's asked.
Brilliant. Look, thank you very much for that submission, and thank you also for
coming on a little bit earlier than scheduled. We appreciate that.
So look, we have got a flurry of questions, so, we'll open up to Grant
McCallum first.
Kia ora, Grant.
Kia ora. Sorry, I wasn't expecting to go first.
Um, now, a question for you, and,
a- and we addressed some of this, came up in the aquaculture s- some of
the aquaculture sector put submissions to us.
It was around the infrastructure ability of,
uh... Do you feel that the-- Do you have any challenge, any challenge with,
from the Māori perspective around inf- developing, aquaculture
infrastructure, particularly onshore, allowing you to, to do your businesses?
And do you feel these bills, address those, or could we do more in this
space?
Uh, the bills don't address those, and we could do more in that space where
firms have a clearly identified plan so that we could have an enterprise
approach. Um, 'cause, for a very
small footprint, aquaculture provides the country with significant,
jobs and earnings, and it's
all reversible. So
in particular, there's a need to make sure that
aquaculture, which is a non-consumptive use for their smolt
hatcheries and spat, are, are treated as
such, rather than being lumped in as if they're about to
pollute the entire, ecosystem.
Mm-hmm. Yeah, thanks for that.
Thank you. Now we'll go to Lann Farm for a question.
Tēnā koutou. Thank you so much for your submission today.
Um, you pick up on your submission on,
environmental limits, and the point that you make is about the
lack of mātauranga Māori in the setting-
Mm-hmm
... of those limits, which is very clearly spelt out.
Um, my broader question was around, the
setting of environmental limits and the fact that
we're hearing a lot from submitters that these bills are setting up
essentially a much more permissive regime
where you actually could put in place,
activities that
you don't need permissions for, particularly
on land, and the impacts that that might have on fresh
water. Now, we know obviously that all of those
impacts flow out to the ocean, and I
wondered about Te Ohu Kaimoana's,
view on the fact that what's proposed is regional
set environmental limits rather
than evidence-based or mātauranga-based
national limits when it comes to environmental limits.
Do you think there should be clear limits that
actually, say, protect our oceans and marine
ecosystems or aquaculture, or are you comfortable with these
limits being set at a regional level, where basically,
environmental protections can be balanced or m- actually must be balanced
with economic and social needs?
Um, I'll just-- Well, I'd probably refer you back to the work that the pou taiao
teams did, in the previous reforms on Te Mana o te Wai.
They, set some amazing, land-based limits
there and did a lot of work on that that would have had positive impacts to the
marine environment. So rather than re-go into that, I'd just point you back to
their submission. But further to that, Lars might be able to expand some more as
well.
So thanks for the question. I think,
it's kind of difficult to have a one-size-fits-all.
You can have a process and you can have general outcomes, but as you would know,
having dealt with Canterbury, even different parts of Canterbury has very different
responses from catchment to catchment.
So you still really need a regional view, to make certain that we're
understanding what's possible. But that doesn't mean in any way that
we would agree that the environment should be re-
despoiled.So.
Thank you. Look, we'll move to Cameron Luxton for a question.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, I just have a quick clarifying question.
Um, we've h- we've heard the same sort of thing from Seafood New Zealand,
saying that there should be a, division between the, what the Fisheries Act
deals with and the, planning laws deal with.
Is that the gist of your submission? Then I have a follow-up question.
Absolutely, yeah. Um, when the settlement was agreed in 1992,
iwi understood, 'cause the Resource Management Act was already
in, and we had marine reserves, that that was going to be the only things
that could... that the RMA specifically did not
overlap with fisheries management.
Um, and so iwi joined and agreed to the quota management system and fisheries
management on that basis.
Okay, thank you for that. And then my follow-up question is about these,
aquaculture settlement. Um, is that the aquaculture settlement areas, like
identifying areas where, where there are,
you know, mussel farms or some such, or does it go broader than
that?
So there's two parts. There's aquaculture settlement areas which, yes, that's where
we, you know, we work with iwi to identify appropriate aquaculture space,
that, that helps with, you know,
meets the obligations of the Crown for the 20% that they owe.
Um, it's also important, important that oral consenting
is able to be, documented so that the Crown has a
fulsome picture of what that 20% obligation is.
The alternative would be that you'd have to set up an apparatus inside MPI and
work with every regional council every year to document what
aquaculture was taking place.
So, so it sounds like... Uh, final question, Chair, if I may.
It, it sounds like you're asking for a, a more complete information
set, rather than a carryover, or am I hearing that differently?
Like, you're asking for, existing areas to be carried over, be recognized in
this new legislation, or are you just asking for a better way of, managing
what's out there, or documenting it?
Uh, no, we're, we're, we're asking, inevitably
what we've got, what iwi we've got approved will carry over.
Uh, and aquaculture settlement areas that the Crown's agreed to where iwi will do
their development will stay. But we definitely need controlled
activities, 'cause that's the most cost-effective way for councils,
for applicants and for iwi to know what aquaculture's happening in each
region.
Thank you.
I will just, add to that. So under the proposed bills, one of our
concerns is that some of the current protections are not being carried over.
We just want to see that all of those current protections are carried over into the
new legislation so that those aquaculture settlement areas
are kept appropriately for iwi, so that the settlement
can be provided for. Kia ora.
Kia ora, thank you. Uh, look, Grant McCollum, we're gonna hoop back round, and then
we'll go to Huhana.
Yeah, just a follow-up question to what, where Cam, Cameron Luxton was
going. Um, around recent court decision allowed,
RMA and regional councils to have an, an
decision-making, ability over the, marine
environment. And, and, and, and, and sort of,
and it's been quite clear. And you've highlighted the fact that you're not...
I get the impression you're not comfortable with that.
You rather were set entirely with the Fisheries Act, because we've had submissions
to the op- saying the opposite.
Can I just clarify, are you talking about the Moutere decision?
Correct, yeah.
Okay. Um,
so we have,
noted within our response that,
the Natural Environment Bill must set out the criteria that proposed fishing rule
must be assessed against the evaluation report.
This should not be set out in the regulations, and that the assessment
criteria in the bill should replicate that set out in the Resource Management
Act, of last year, so the 2025 one.
Um, would you like to speak a bit more though to the Moutere-
Yeah, our first preference, Grant, is that there's a clear line and
there isn't an overlap. That existed up until 2019 with the Moutere
decision, which-
Yeah
... Te Ohu Kaimoana and others didn't participate in.
We spent more than a half a million dollars, in the Northland case.
We're probably gonna spell close to the thick end of that.
It doesn't provide any clarity. Um, we've got rights
in perpetuity for fishing that can be collapsed overnight, whereas if I'm a
polluter, I've got to the end of the term.
So we very much think the best solution is to go back to that clean
cut. What Kylie's outlined is
if Parliament continues to want to have a messy system in
which we have duplication, there there need to be better clear rules spelled out
for that.
Yeah. Th- thank you. That's very helpful. Thank you.
Thank you. And Huhana, you've got your hand up there.
Tena koutou te Ohu Kaimoana. Mihi nui ana ki a koutou.
Just a quick question around engagement.
Um, similar to my pātā to Pou Taiao, how
much was Te Ohu Kaimoana engaged in the development of the
f- legislation, these legislations?
Uh, and what was the quality of that engagement?
Do you feel as though you've been heard and your recommendations have been
adopted?
Um, I think that we were surprised to see some of the fishing
controls not included, when we were told they would be.
Um, otherwise I th- I wouldn't say we had,
a huge amount of time to respond, and I, I can't imagine that the
departments developing it did either.
So I think there's a systematic, issue
there around the development of the bills as a whole as opposed
to, our engagement more, more specifically.
I think that across the board there probably wasn't enough time, and
people shared what they could, but there were serious limitations to that as
well. Um, however, we have had some engagement from some of the
policy teams who have sought approval from select committee to help in
that kind of clarification and follow-up, and I think this is gonna be highly re-
valued,
engagement going forward to get some of that written,
recommendations right, as we've seen some of, the
clause adoptions that we've recommended in the past not quite land through lack of
engagement after a select committee process.
Um, so hopefully that-
Madam Chair, if I can sup on that, please?
Yeah, no, yep, go for it.
Thank you. As we have a little bit more time, I just wanted to, query, 'cause
we've heard from many iwi groups who have, negotiated
settlements and their fears that there would be a breach on
the agreements made in settlement.
Is it similar, Te Ohu Kaimoana has these fears that if the
recommendations from your organization are not upheld, that
we could see modern breaches to the agreements, for Māori
fisheries, ngā rawa hou ika?
Uh, yeah, I mean-
Yes
... depending on how it's written, but yes.
Yes. Point of today, yes, absolutely.
Thank you. Kia ora.
Look, thank you very much for your submission today.
Um, and thank you for coming on a bit earlier. We appreciate your time.
Um, and also just a really, you know, well laid out, well written submission.
So we do appreciate that as a committee, 'cause it's always, good when they're
laid out really well. So thank you very much.
Ka pai. Thank you.
We look forward to working with you.
Thank you.
Uh, look, members, we are just going to, take a
break now. Um, and we will resume with
Dairy NZ at 9:40. So if
we can all come back on before that submission, that would be
great.